[WIP] RFC 3: languages (#28)
SoxinOS/soxin: rfcs/0003-languages.md

feature integrates with the project was needed.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

## Language definition

Languages would be defined in a module named `soxin.programming.languages`.
Each language, would be an attribute set in this module:

```
soxin.programming.languages = {
  go = { /* ... */ };
  java = { /* ... */ };
  python = { /* ... */ };
}
```
## Tools defination

Programming tools will be defined in a module named `soxin.programming.tools`.
Each tool will be an attribute set in this module.

```
soxin.programming.tools = {
  git = { /* ... */ };
  tmux = { /* ... */ };
}
```
This allows Soxin to define its own support for languages and tools, while
allowing room for user customization as well.

Similar to RFC 2, each programming language must include a key for each editor
which will support that language.  For instance, it could be a plugin for that
editor that installs support for that language, plus some extra configuration
to configure that plugin.

## User interaction

### Globally

Similar to RFC 2, a `soxin.settings.programming.languages` and
`soxin.settings.programming.tools` option would be introduced to allow the user

> to choose his programming stack. The only permitted values here shall be the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to choose their programming stack. The only permitted values here shall be the
```

defined in `config.soxin.programming.<type>`. This option shall be of type
`Array` of `str`, with apply function which iterate over the array and find
appropriate languages or tools.

### Per-program

Each program that supports a language must provide a
`soxin.programs.<program-name>.programming.language` and

> `soxin.programs.<editor-name>.programming.tool` option to allow the user to

Reviewer: I think we should avoid specifying the type of the module. So instead of saying `each program` we should say each module.

override the programming language stack settings per program. These options will default
to `config.soxin.settings.programming.<type>`, and thus will be of type
`attrs`. Similar to RFC 2, they will also have will also allow `str` and have
an `apply` function that will lookup the theme from `config.soxin.programming.<type>`
for each option.

# Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

Here's how one could define a language and a tool implementing only the `neovim`
editor:

```
{ pkgs, ... }:

{
  config.soxin.programming.languages = {
    go = {
      neovim = {
        plugins = [ pkgs.neovim.go ];
        extraRC = ''
        '';
      };
    };

    config.soxin.programming.tools = {
      git = {
        plugins = [ pkgs.neovim.fugitive ];
        extraRc = ''
        '';
      };
    };
  };
}
```

Here's how this would be implemented on the editor side:

```
{ config, lib, ... }:

let
  cfg = config.soxin.programs.neovim;

>   goSupportRc = cfg.programming.languages.go ? "";

Reviewer: The returned type of this is an attrset, not a string; Shouldn't it be `.go ? {}`?

  gitSupportRc = cfg.programming.tools.git ? "";
  goSupportPlugins = cfg.programming.languages.go.plugins ? [];
  gitSupportPlugins = cfg.programming.tools.git.plugins ? [];
{
  config.program.neovim = lib.mkIf soxin.programs.neovim.enable {
    enable = true;
    configure = ''
      /* Some configuration */
      ${goSupportRc}
      ${gitSupportRc}
    '';

>     plugins = [ /* Some plugins */ ] ++ goSupportPlugins ++ gitSupportPlugins;

Reviewer: Thinking about this, I don't think it should say go or git, instead, it should add the RC and plugins of all enabled language and tools in soxin's settings.

---

> feature: (languages)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
feature: languages
```
But it should probably be something like `tools-and-programming-languages`

> start-date: (2021-04-30)
> author: (Shahrukh Khan)
> related-issues: (None)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
start-date: 2021-04-30
author: Shahrukh Khan
related-issues: None
```
For related issues and PRs, there are the previous RFCs about themes and mkSoxinModule

---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> This RFC describes how language support is to be implemented in Soxin. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This RFC describes how tools and programming languages support is to be implemented in Soxin. This
```
Let's be specific so it doesn't get confused with i18n.

breaks down in two areas:

* How languages are defined, i-e how to define the language and its properties
  i-e its compiler, tools, editor plugins etc. How the user can define the

>   defualt plugins for a language in his editor(s).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  default plugins for a language in their editor(s).
```

* How the user can select default set of languages and its required tools in

>   his editor, and how to override default settings on the editor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  their editor, and how to override default settings per-editor.
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

As Soxin is aimed at providing its users with easy-to-configure software, while
allowing for great customization, an RFC describing how such an important
feature integrates with the project was needed.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

## Language definition

Languages would be defined in a module named `soxin.programming.languages`.
Each language, would be an attribute set in this module:

> ```

Reviewer 2: Examples are more appropriate in the `Example` section of the RFC.

soxin.programming.languages = {
  go = { /* ... */ };
  java = { /* ... */ };

>   python = { /* ... */ };

Reviewer 2: What would these attribute contain?

}
```
## Tools defination

> Programming tools will be defined in a module named `soxin.programming.tools`.

Reviewer 2: If I recall correctly, we discussed the name of this option with @kalbasit two weeks ago, and concluded it would be better named `soxin.tools`, as some of the tools we would put in there are not only used for programming.
We might also consider renaming `soxin.programming.languages` to `soxin.programmingLanguages`, along with the appropriate options in `soxin.settings` and per-module, of course.

Each tool will be an attribute set in this module.

```
soxin.programming.tools = {
  git = { /* ... */ };

>   tmux = { /* ... */ };

Reviewer 2: What would these attribute contain?

}
```

> This allows soxin to define its own support for languages and tools, while

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows Soxin to define its own support for languages and tools, while
```

allowing room for user customization as well.

Similar to RFC 2, each programming language must include a key for each editor
which will support that language.  For instance, it could be a plugin for that
editor that installs support for that language, plus some extra configuration
to configure that plugin.

## User interaction

### Globally

Similar to RFC 2, a `soxin.settings.programming.languages` and

> `soxin.settings.programming.tools` option would be introduced to allow the user

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`soxin.settings.tools` option would be introduced to allow the user
```
See above.

to choose his programming stack. The only permitted values here shall be the
defined in `config.soxin.programming.<type>`. This option shall be of type

> `Array` of `str`, with apply function which iterate over the array and find

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Array` of `str`, with an apply function which iterates over the array and finds
```

> appropriate language or tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
appropriate languages or tools.
```

> ### Per-editor

Reviewer 2: That would probably not be editor specific. When you enable `go`, for example, you might want to have the Go compiler in your environment. It might also configure your shell prompt to change depending on whether you are in a Python virtual environment. It would probably be `per-program` or `per-module`.
Note: this is not the only place in the RFC where that nomenclature should be changed.

Each editor that supports a language must provide a

> `soxin.programs.<editor-name>.language` and `soxin.programs.<editor-name>.tool`

Reviewer 2: So shouldn't it be `soxin.programs.<editor-name>.programming.language`?

Here's how one could define a language and a tool implementing only the `neovim`
editor:

```
{ pkgs, ... }:

{
  config.soxin.programming.languages = {
    go = {
      neovim = {
        plugins = [ pkgs.neovim.go ];
        extraRC = ''
        '';
      };
    };

    config.soxin.programming.tools = {
      git = {
        plugins = [ pkgs.neovim.fugitive ];
        extraRc = ''
        '';
      };
    };
  };
}
```

Here's how this would be implemented on the editor side:

```
{ config, lib, ... }:

let
  cfg = config.soxin.programs.neovim;
  goSupportRc = cfg.programming.languages.go ? "";
  gitSupportRc = cfg.programming.tools.git ? "";
  goSupportPlugins = cfg.programming.languages.go.plugins ? [];
  gitSupportPlugins = cfg.programming.tools.git.plugins ? [];
{
  config.program.neovim = lib.mkIf soxin.programs.neovim.enable {
    enable = true;
    configure = ''
      /* Some configuration */
      ${goSupportRc}
      ${gitSupportRc}
    '';

    plugins = [ /* Some plugins */ ] ++ goSupportPlugins ++ gitSupportPlugins;
  };
}
```

The options of the `programs.neovim` have been modified for simplicity's sake.

# Examples and Interactions

> [examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

Reviewer 2: This is duplicated.

# Drawbacks

> [drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Reviewer 2: One drawback I might add, is that we might not make the difference between `soxin.programs` and `soxin.tools`. What would it be and what are the criteria for putting a module under `programs` rather than `tools`?

Reviewer: Can we add a definition section at the top of the RFC to explain this?

My 2cents: go is a language but gorename is not, it's a tool. Go like any other language may also enable one or more tools.
